== Myth #8: The Free Market Exploits Workers

=== Income Inequality Among Workers

There are some points to make regarding workers, inequality and the free market
which parallel those made above regarding entrepreneurs.

We can think of a worker as an entrepreneur whose product to sell is his labor,
and whose customer is another entrepreneur (who runs a firm). As noted above,
in the free market the worker cannot force his product on his customer. He has
to offer sufficient value to his customer for his customer to be willing
voluntarily to part with some of his income to purchase the worker’s labor.

If the worker can consistently provide enough value to his customer, then he
will be paid well and may end up relatively wealthy as a result. The worker can
add to the value he can offer his customer through obtaining experience or
education in a relevant area, remaining in good health, having a good attitude,
etc., and with this increased value may be able to command an increased price
for his product in the form of higher wages (subject, of course, to the impact
of competition from other workers competing to sell their labor to the same
entrepreneur).

However, a worker who doesn’t have the same experience, education, health,
attitude, etc. will not be able to earn as much because he won’t be providing
as much value to his customer, and such a worker may end up living in relative
poverty.

This is how inequality of income for workers arises in the free market: those
who do a better job as employees end up with more than those who do a poorer
job. Those workers who attain very high incomes in this manner are not
deserving of any disdain. Like the entrepreneur, their high incomes simply
reflect the fact that they have contributed significant value to their
customers (in this case, entrepreneurs) who have been willing to voluntarily
compensate them for such value.

However, there is also a parallel to the “political entrepreneur” who does
deserve our disdain, namely, the “political worker.” This is the worker who
seeks to use the state’s coercive powers to get special privileges vis-à-vis
employers, principally through regulations relating to labor unions, minimum
wage and working conditions, and anti-discrimination (affirmative action).

Labor unions are not objectionable per se , since there is nothing wrong with
employees banding together to try to negotiate better terms from an employer.
However, what is morally objectionable is when unions obtain special rights and
protections from the state.  footnote:[Note that labor union legislation is
often as much about feathering the nest of union leaders vis-à-vis union
members as it is about “helping” employees vis-à-vis employers. Union leaders
can often force workers to become union members, pay dues, strike and support
action programs to which the workers may object, all of which increase the
power and compensation of the union leaders.] It is one thing for employees to
collectively bargain with an employer where all parties are voluntarily
engaging in such discussions, are free to accept or reject any proposal and any
representatives without any violent consequences, and are free to enforce their
legitimate property rights. It is quite another for a labor union to use the
state’s coercive powers to (i) force an employer to negotiate exclusively with
the union (including providing the union with organizing space on the
employer’s property), and to require all employees to be represented
exclusively by such union whether they want this or not, (ii) force an employer
to make or accept any particular proposals, or (iii) restrict the range of
defensive actions an employer may take in response to any threatened or actual
violent strike action implemented by the union against the employer or the
employer’s property, as well as against any workers who may not want to abide
by the strike action.

As regards minimum wage, working condition and anti-discrimination regulations,
I will deal with these below.

=== Worker Exploitation In The Free Market

Statists often argue that workers are liable to be unfairly exploited
economically by entrepreneurs in the free market, and thus state intervention
is necessary to prevent this. However, this doesn’t make any sense. It suggests
that the relationship is coercive, as if the employer can force the worker to
take a job with low pay and terrible working conditions and the worker has no
option but to submit, and that the employer is immune to outside pressures when
setting these terms. It also suggests that statist intervention can improve on
the free market. There are several points to make about this.

*First* , a worker’s potential total compensation (comprising cash, benefits
and working conditions) has a lower bound and an upper bound. The lower bound
is determined by competition for the worker from other employers.  If there is
vigorous competition the lower bound will be higher, and if there is little
competition it will be lower.  The upper bound is determined by how productive
a worker is, i.e., how much value he can provide to the employer. The more
skills a worker has, or the more capital equipment or technology available to
make the worker more productive, the higher the upper bound. Low-skilled
workers and workers in economies with little capital equipment or technology
tend to face a low upper bound.

In the free market both of these bounds should be higher than in a statist
economy, and thus workers would do tend to do better.

Regarding the lower bound, the free market would be characterized by an absence
of artificial restrictions on new firms entering an industry and on small firms
competing effectively, i.e., no state-awarded monopoly privileges, no licensing
requirements, and no regulatory costs or taxes and thus more capital available
for businesses to use in productive operations. Hence there would tend to be
more firms bidding for a worker’s services.

With respect to the upper bound, there would be no artificial restrictions on
human and physical capital formation, i.e., there would be unhindered
competition among education providers, leading to higher quality education; no
artificial price inflation in education caused by state subsidies; no taxes on
individuals’ incomes, thereby providing workers with more money to invest in
their personal development; and no taxes or regulations on physical capital,
allowing firms to utilize more of it. Hence workers would tend to be better
educated and have more capital and technology at their disposal, making them
more productive.

*Second* , the employment arrangement in the free market is voluntary, and thus
the worker can always refuse to work under the proposed terms and seek
employment elsewhere if he thinks he can do better. It’s wrong to say that the
worker is the only one in need: the employer obviously needs the worker to
perform some labor, otherwise he wouldn’t make an employment offer. It is just
a question of price and conditions.

As noted above, the employer will offer no more than the value he thinks the
worker can add relative to the total cost of employing him.  footnote:[This is
where state intervention has an adverse impact: if the state sets a minimum
wage above the worker’s productive value or requires the employer to pay
payroll taxes or to provide specific benefits to a worker, thus raising his
total cost, then the employer may either determine not to make an offer or to
reduce his offer of cash wages to keep the total cost to where it makes sense
to employ the worker. The important point is that the state would be an outside
party imposing these costs on an employer even if the worker and employer would
be willing to engage in a differently structured voluntary arrangement.] In the
free market other employers who are interested in the worker are free to make
competing offers, and thus if the worker wants to figure out what he’s worth he
can solicit as many offers as possible. If there are no competing offers, or
the worker doesn’t like the best terms available to him, this is not the fault
of any employer. It’s the fault of reality. Perhaps the worker doesn’t have as
valuable a skill set as he thinks he has.

The important point to note is that if an employer has a need for a worker, it
makes no sense to intentionally underpay him and risk losing him to another
firm. However, “underpay” always means relative to the lower and upper bounds
noted above as subjectively assessed by that employer, and not according to
some third-party- determined, utopian, centralized “objective” value, such as
that often imposed by the state or its proxies.

*Third* , the whole notion of “exploitation” is a misnomer since it implies
some wrong on the part of the employer.  Yet there is no principle which
supports this conclusion.

No worker can possess a positive “right” to a job nor to any particular
compensation. If an employer makes an offer to a worker, the employer is making
a voluntary decision to divert some of his income to purchase the worker’s
services and to provide particular working conditions. To claim that a worker
has a “right” to a job or to any particular compensation or working conditions
implies that the worker has a right to the employer’s income that is superior
to the employer’s right! What principle can justify this?

To illustrate this in a different way, consider another type of commercial
relationship, namely, the customer/vendor relationship. No statist ever accuses
a customer of “exploiting” a vendor if the customer decides to withhold his
dollars and not purchase a product from the vendor for any reason whatsoever,
or requires a lower price before he will purchase that product. In fact,
customers regularly bankrupt vendors whose products they no longer wish to
purchase for whatever personal reasons they have. Statists are rightly of the
view that the customer is free to do with his income as he pleases.

So how can it be that there is a different principle when the customer is an
employer and the vendor is a worker selling his services? The explanation
cannot be that the worker is a unique vendor case because he is not a product
but, rather, a person offering a service; there are plenty of personal service
vendors in business. What if a vendor is operating a business as a house
painter or a gardener? For a customer to withhold a purchase of those services,
or require a lower price, is to act exactly like the employer who decides not
to employ a worker or to offer lower wages than a worker is demanding. Is one
case “exploitation” and the other not?

What if the same person is both a customer and an employer? For instance,
consider the following example: businessman X decides to purchase outsourced
janitorial services from A and not B because A’s prices are lower, and when X
advertises for a new receptionist he prefers C to D because C is willing to
accept a lower wage. Would the statist insist in both instances that X be
forced to spend his income on the higher priced vendor (B and D)? If not, why
not? To ask these questions is to answer them.  footnote:[Or consider this
situation: E quits his job and opens up his own lawn mowing business. Does it
make sense to say that before E quit he could have looked to the state to force
his employer to employ him and pay him a certain amount, yet after he quits he
cannot look to the state to force his ex-employer to purchase his lawn mowing
services at his specified price?]

The folly of the “exploitation” thinking can also be illustrated by considering
the proposed employment relationship from the reverse perspective. If a worker
decides to work for an employer he is making a voluntary decision to use his
body in the employer’s production process. It would not be wrong for the worker
to withhold his body nor to demand more attractive compensation before he
supplies his body. Would this mean the worker is “exploiting” the employer? No!
The employer has no right to the worker’s efforts that is superior to the
worker’s right; that would be chattel slavery. If this is true, why should the
worker have any superior right to the employer’s income?

Statists are conditioned to assume that the employer is always in the superior
bargaining position compared with the worker and that it is the task of those
at the state to use coercion to “balance this out.” As noted above, even if
that were true that would be a function of reality (or of prior state
intervention), not a fault of the employer against whom the coercion would be
levied (i.e., why punish the employer for committing no wrong?). And using
coercion is never moral.  footnote:[In addition, consider highly sought after
executives, athletes and movie stars. Who generally “calls the shots” in those
instances? Why don’t statists propose using coercion to deal with the
exploitation of those workers’ employers?]

However, even this assumption is not generally true; in fact, anyone who claims
it is has probably never run a business, since the biggest ongoing concern of
most managers is attracting and retaining productive employees.  Moreover, if
employers always had the superior bargaining position then presumably they
would only pay employees the legislated minimum wage (why pay more than the
state forces you to pay?). Yet the vast majority of employees in the U.S. who
are paid on an hourly basis are paid more than the relevant minimum wage,
suggesting the importance of non-state factors, e.g., competition for workers.
footnote:[Note that Switzerland has no minimum wage, and yet we’re not used to
thinking about Swiss workers living at a subsistence level; in fact, according
to some reports they’re among the highest paid workers in the world. Just based
on the interaction of the supply of and the demand for labor. Imagine that.]

*Fourth* , statists also overlook the fact that in the free market, where the
customer is free to purchase the employer’s product or not, it is the customer
who ultimately controls the employer’s revenues and therefore the funds from
which the employer can purchase future factors of production, including labor.
If customers turn against the employer because they wish to use their dollars
elsewhere, and the employer anticipates this will continue in the future, then
the financial pressure on the employer will cause him to recalibrate the mix of
factors to purchase and how much he can pay for them if he wishes to remain in
business and generate an acceptable return on capital.  footnote:[The corollary
to this is that if the state artificially raises the cost of labor and the
employer anticipates he will not be able to pass this additional cost onto the
customer, then, all else being equal, the employer will have to scale back his
purchase of labor.]

In this respect, for the most part (activists aside), customers are
cold-hearted. They care not one whiff about the plight of the employer or his
workers, and will pull their dollars for the most feckless or even
indiscernible reasons.  Thus if the statist wants to levy blame at any party in
the free market for downward pressure on workers’ compensation, he ought not
forget the customer.


=== Discrimination In The Free Market

Statists also worry about another form of exploitation in the free market,
namely, class discrimination. It is claimed that if the state does not protect
certain classes of individuals then some employers will simply not employ them
due to their race, gender, sexual orientation, etc.  footnote:[So far statists
haven’t defined ugly people, fat people or short people as protected classes,
even though some employers may well have strong and often times justifiable
views about not employing these types of people. Perhaps when these groups get
sufficiently organized to lobby the state they too will attain state-protected
status.]

Once again this shows a profound misunderstanding of how the free market would
work.

In the free market discrimination has a real economic cost to the
discriminator. For instance, if an employer refused to employ Jews then he
would be artificially reducing his supply of labor; as basic economics teaches,
if there is a reduced supply, all else being equal, the price will be higher.
Thus this employer would end up paying more for his labor than those who do not
discriminate. If he were willing to bear that cost that would be his choice --
employing someone means using his own income, which surely he must be free to
spend as he sees fit -– but his competitors who are willing to employ Jews would
have a distinct cost advantage in terms of a wider pool of labor, and thus
should be able to out-compete this employer.  Similarly, if an employer decided
to underpay women relative to men for the same value labor, his competitors
would be able to offer more to entice his women employees away and he would be
left with higher priced male labor and thus lower margins than before.

The other aspect to bear in mind is social ostracization.

If an employer is known to refuse to employ (or serve) a certain group, such as
blacks or Asians, as word gets around those customers who object to his views
will cease patronizing his business, which will have a real economic cost too.
Competitors may open up close by and make it very clear that they employ and
serve everyone, thereby putting acute pressure on the employer in question.
footnote:[Statists also miss the fact that, in this way, the free market
exposes the discriminator for all to see. However, if state legislation
requires the discriminator to employ or serve those whom he despises, then his
racism, sexism, etc. will remain hidden. Wouldn’t the statist prefer to know
who the discriminators are?]

In other words, in the free market class discrimination cannot endure for long,
as a discriminator will be at a distinct economic disadvantage relative to
those who don’t discriminate, and thus he will likely not survive.
footnote:[That is, unless the discriminator can serve the likely small pool of
like-minded customers who are willing to pay more to buy from the
discriminator. If so, that is their collective choice. Who is the state to say
they cannot do this? Their money is theirs to spend as they see fit.]

This is why so much of the history of class discrimination has been brought
about by the state itself: those who favor class discrimination cannot reliably
depend on the free market to help their cause, and thus they have always
resorted to lobbying for legislation to legally discriminate by coercive means.

For instance, in the antebellum north in the U.S. a number of states, such as
Illinois, Indiana and Maryland, passed legislation to prevent or restrict free
blacks from moving to these states, owning property and working in certain
trades. Similarly, in the post-Reconstruction south the “Jim Crow” legislative
enactments were passed to mandate segregation of blacks and whites in many
areas of society. In all of these cases, those who wanted to discriminate
against blacks saw that too many whites were willing to trade with, employ and
generally fraternize with blacks, and thus the only way to enforce
discrimination was to use the state’s coercive powers. This was also the reason
for the enactment in South Africa of its apartheid legislation in the
mid-20^th^ century.

The same theme applied, although against a different target group, in Nazi
Germany in the 1930s: those who wanted to discriminate against Jews couldn’t
depend upon the free market and thus they had to pass numerous pieces of
anti-Jew legislation.

As a final example, labor unions in the U.S. aggressively lobbied the federal
government in the early 20^th^ century to pass minimum wage legislation. The
unions would not accept black workers as members, but black workers were
willing to work for lower wages than the white union workers, and employers
were willing to employ black workers at these lower wages. Thus the free market
was a threat to white union workers’ jobs. However, by setting the minimum wage
above the black workers’ productive value, state intervention effectively
priced black labor out of the market.

=== State Discrimination

Through today’s affirmative action legislation, individuals at the state
routinely intervene on behalf of protected classes of workers, either requiring
employers to hire workers in these classes or fining employers if they don’t
treat such workers the way the individuals at the state deem appropriate.
footnote:[In this respect, there is also a substantial compliance and
recordkeeping cost imposed on employers by the state, which simply means fewer
employer resources available to hire workers. In addition, to the extent they
have a choice, employers are likely more reticent to even interview, never mind
hire, workers in protected classes for fear of the additional liability they
bring if the employer doesn’t comply with the whims of those at the state once
the employer has made first contact with the worker.  This can hardly be to the
benefit of those who are allegedly protected by affirmative action
legislation.]

However, what exactly is denied to a worker when they are discriminated
against? As noted earlier, from the employer’s perspective offering a job
requires the diversion of some of the employer’s income to the employee.  How
can a worker have a “right” to that portion of the employer’s income? Also as
noted earlier, if the worker can deny his bodily efforts to the employer for
any reason whatsoever, why can the employer not similarly deny the diversion of
some of his income to the worker for any reason whatsoever? In other words, if
it is deemed actionable if an Asian employer refuses to employ a Hispanic
worker because he is Hispanic, why is it not also actionable if the Hispanic
worker refuses to offer his labor services to the Asian employer because the
employer is Asian?  footnote:[To be clear, I am not suggesting that these forms
of behavior should be socially acceptable, only that they do not represent the
taking or denial of anything to which the aggrieved party is properly entitled,
and thus do not justify the use of force or the threat of force by the state as
a remedy.]

And, to extend a broader analogy raised earlier in the customer/vendor
situation, why is it not actionable if an Asian customer refuses to buy from a
Hispanic vendor because he is Hispanic?

What state action in this area represents, in essence, is the individuals at
the state arrogating to themselves the right to tell an employer how to spend
his income and how to treat others; in other words, the individuals at the
state (on behalf of the protected classes) claim a priority property right in
the employer’s personal resources and body. From where do these individuals at
the state get this right?

Moreover, the state divides the world into two groups – the protected classes
and everyone else – and uses its coercive powers in a discriminating manner in
favor of the protected classes and therefore against everyone else.
Predictably, this leads to aggressive lobbying by groups not in a protected
class either to be defined into the existing protected classes or to expand the
range of protected classes to cover their own situations. In other words, there
is now lobbying to rent the state’s coercive powers to discriminate.

This is the solution to the perceived free market “problem” of discrimination?
